OCaml
Monoids and Monads - 3 (also known as The Day the
student stood still)

Summary: The main theme of this module is to introduce the Monoids and the
Monads. This is hard but not as hard as it seems.
Version: 1.00

Contents
I

Foreword

2

II

General rules

3

III

Ocaml piscine, general rules

4

IV

Day-specific rules

6

V

Exercise 00: All Along the Watchtower

7

VI

Exercise 01: The "Alan Parson’s Project"

8

VII

Exercise 02: These aren’t the functoids you’re looking for

10

VIII

Exercise 03: Try. Or at least try to try. Or die trying.

12

IX

Exercise 04: Game, Set and Match.

13

X

Submission and Peer Evaluation

15

1

Chapter I
Foreword
Gentlemen, Ladies, you are the top 1 percent of all OCaml programmers from 42. The
elite. The best of the best. We’ll make you better . . . You might say we’ll make you the
best of the best of the best. Those of you who can’t cut it to graduation will still be the
best of the best. But you will simply be the rest of the best of the best, not the best of
the best of the best, like the best of you will be.
As programmers in the Almighty 42 School, you are no doubt used to coding with the
best. But those coders, however good, are not the best of the best. They are only the
rest of the best. And while the rest of the best are good, they’re obviously not as good
as you, the best of the best. Even the worst among you here at 42, or the worst of the
rest of the best of the best, are better than even the best of the rest of the best.
Many of you are probably wondering who the best coder here is. That plaque back
there is where we list the Top Coders for each class, or the best of the best of the best . . .
of the best. There can only be one Top Coder per class, so don’t be hard on yourselves
if you only wind up being the rest of the best of the best . . . of the best. You’ll still
be better than those I mentioned before who couldn’t cut it—the rest of the best of the
best—and, of course, better than the other coders who weren’t even admitted to 42 in
the first place—the rest of the best.
So, to recap: There’s the best of the best of the best of the best, or 42. Then there’s the
rest of the best of the best of the best, which is everyone who makes it to graduation and
who was previously only the best of the best. Then there are those who couldn’t make
it to graduation—the worst of the best of the best, who are still better than the best of
the rest in the world. Simple.
I don’t imagine you have any questions, so I won’t even ask. Good luck, ladies and
gentlemen. I’ll see you in the cluster. Class dismissed.

2

Chapter II
General rules
• Your project must be realized in a virtual machine.
• Your virtual machine must have all the necessary software to complete your project.
These softwares must be configured and installed.
• You can choose the operating system to use for your virtual machine.
• You must be able to use your virtual machine from a cluster computer.
• You must use a shared folder between your virtual machine and your host machine.
• During your evaluations you will use this folder to share with your repository.
• Your functions should not quit unexpectedly (segmentation fault, bus error, double
free, etc) apart from undefined behaviors. If this happens, your project will be
considered non functional and will receive a 0 during the evaluation.
• We encourage you to create test programs for your project even though this work
won’t have to be submitted and won’t be graded. It will give you a chance
to easily test your work and your peers’ work. You will find those tests especially
useful during your defence. Indeed, during defence, you are free to use your tests
and/or the tests of the peer you are evaluating.
• Submit your work to your assigned git repository. Only the work in the git repository will be graded. If Deepthought is assigned to grade your work, it will be done
after your peer-evaluations. If an error happens in any section of your work during
Deepthought’s grading, the evaluation will stop.

3

Chapter III
Ocaml piscine, general rules
• Every output goes to the standard output, and will be ended by a newline, unless
specified otherwise.
• The imposed filenames must be followed to the letter, as well as class names, function names and method names, etc.
• Unless otherwise explicitly stated, the keywords open, for and while are forbidden.
Their use will be flagged as cheating, no questions asked.
• Turn-in directories are ex00/, ex01/, . . . , exn/.
• You must read the examples thoroughly. They can contain requirements that are
not obvious in the exercise’s description.
• Since you are allowed to use the OCaml syntaxes you learned about since the beginning of the piscine, you are not allowed to use any additional syntaxes, modules
and libraries unless explicitly stated otherwise.
• The exercices must be done in order. The graduation will stop at the first failed
exercice. Yes, the old school way.
• Read each exercise FULLY before starting it! Really, do it.
• The compiler to use is ocamlopt. When you are required to turn in a function, you
must also include anything necessary to compile a full executable. That executable
should display some tests that prove that you’ve done the exercise correctly.
• Remember that the special token ";;" is only used to end an expression in the
interpreter. Thus, it must never appear in any file you turn in. Regardless, the
interpreter is a powerfull ally, learn to use it at its best as soon as possible!
• The subject can be modified up to 4 hours before the final turn-in time.
• In case you’re wondering, no coding style is enforced during the OCaml piscine. You
can use any style you like, no restrictions. But remember that a code your peerevaluator can’t read is a code he or she can’t grade. As usual, big functions are a
weak style.
• You will NOT be graded by a program, unless explictly stated in the subject.
Therefore, you are given a certain amount of freedom in how you choose to do the
4

OCaml

Monoids and Monads - 3 (also known as The Day the student stood still)

exercises. However, some piscine day might explicitly cancel this rule, and you will
have to respect directions and outputs perfectly.
• Only the requested files must be turned in and thus present on the repository during
the peer-evaluation.
• Even if the subject of an exercise is short, it’s worth spending some time on it to
be absolutely sure you understand what’s expected of you, and that you did it in
the best possible way.
• By Odin, by Thor! Use your brain!!!

5

Chapter IV
Day-specific rules
• Some themes of this day can be hard to understand. Feel free to practice as much as
you can. They will all be used wisely and frequently during your OCaml developer’s
life.
• You are in a functional programming pool, so your coding style MUST be functional (except for the side effects for input/output). I insist, your code MUST be
functional; otherwise, you’ll have a tedious defence session.
• For each exercise of the day, you must provide sufficient material for testing during the defence session. Every functionality that can’t be tested won’t be
graded!
• YOU MUST WATCH this video: Bryan Beckman - Don’t Fear the Monad

6

Chapter V
Exercise 00: All Along the
Watchtower
Exercise : 00
Exercise 00: All Along the Watchtower
Turn-in directory : ex00/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

In this exercise, you will implement a basic monoid named Watchtower. This monoid
is an implementation of Brian Beckman’s concept of clock monoid.
Your monoid will contain:
• A type hour as an alias for type int.
• A zero.
• An add rule to add hours according to the concept of a 12-hour clock.
• A sub rule to subtract hours according to the concept of a 12-hour clock.
Your monoid will have the following signature:
module Watchtower :
sig
type hour = int
val zero : hour
val add : hour -> hour -> hour
val sub : hour -> hour -> hour
end

You must provide sufficient testing for your evaluation session.

7

Chapter VI
Exercise 01: The "Alan Parson’s
Project"
Exercise : 01
Exercise 01: The "Alan Parson’s Project"
Turn-in directory : ex01/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

In this exercise, you will implement a basic monoid named App.
This monoid is an implementation of a project manager.
Your monoid will contain:
• A type project as a product type consisting of a string, a string representing
status (either "fail" or "succeed"), and an integer for the grade.
• A zero, which consists of two empty strings and a 0.
• A combine rule to combine two projects, resulting in a new project with
the strings concatenated and the average of the grades. If the average
is above 80, the status is "succeed"; otherwise, it’s "failed".
• A fail rule to create a new project from the project passed as a parameter,
with a grade equal to 0 and status set to "failed".
• A success rule to create a new project from the project passed as a parameter,
with a grade of 80 and status set to "succeed".
• Additionally, you will provide a print_proj function in your main for
testing purposes, typed as App.project -> unit.
You will provide sufficient testing for your evaluation session.

8

OCaml

Monoids and Monads - 3 (also known as The Day the student stood still)

Your monoid will have the following signature:
module App :
sig
type project = string * string * int
val zero : project
val combine : project -> project -> project
val fail : project -> project
val success : project -> project
end

9

Chapter VII
Exercise 02: These aren’t the
functoids you’re looking for
Exercise : 02
Exercise 02: These aren’t the functoids you’re looking for
Turn-in directory : ex02/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

In this exercise, you will implement some arithmetic monoid modules named INT and
FLOAT to use them in a functor and in various abstract calculation functions.
Your INT and FLOAT modules will contain:
• A type named element as an alias of the obvious matching type.
• A zero for the addition and subtraction rule named zero1.
• A zero for the multiplication and division rule named zero2.
• Add and subtract rules to add and subtract two elements of type element.
• Multiply and divide rules to multiply and divide two elements of type
element.
After that, you will implement a Calc functor which takes a module of type MONOID
as a parameter and includes the following functions:
• An add function which uses the add of the Monoid.
• A sub function which uses the sub of the Monoid.
• A mul function which uses the mul of the Monoid.
• A div function which uses the div of the Monoid.
• A power function which calculates the power of a parameter x by a second
parameter of type int, always positive.
10

OCaml

Monoids and Monads - 3 (also known as The Day the student stood still)

• A fact function which calculates the factorial of a parameter of type
element.
You will provide sufficient testing for your evaluation session.
Your monoids will have the following signature:
module type MONOID =
sig
type element
val zero1 : element
val zero2 : element
val mul : element -> element -> element
val add : element -> element -> element
val div : element -> element -> element
val sub : element -> element -> element
end

Your Calc functor will have the following signature :
module Calc :
functor (M : MONOID) ->
sig
val add : M.element -> M.element -> M.element
val sub : M.element -> M.element -> M.element
val mul : M.element -> M.element -> M.element
val div : M.element -> M.element -> M.element
val power : M.element -> int -> M.element
val fact : M.element -> M.element
end

Below is an basic (ang ugly as hell!) way to check your monoid and your functor.
module Calc_int = Calc(INT)
module Calc_float = Calc(FLOAT)
let () =
print_endline (string_of_int (Calc_int.power 3 3));
print_endline (string_of_float (Calc_float.power 3.0 3));
print_endline (string_of_int (Calc_int.mul (Calc_int.add 20 1) 2));
print_endline (string_of_float (Calc_float.mul (Calc_float.add 20.0 1.0) 2.0))

Obviously, there’s a lot more to test...

11

Chapter VIII
Exercise 03: Try. Or at least try to
try. Or die trying.
Exercise : 03
Try or try not; there’s no try. No, wait...
Turn-in directory : ex03/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

In this exercise, you will implement a monad named Try to provide a more functional
and elegant way to handle exceptions. An instance of Try can be either of the following:
• Success of ’a
• Failure of exn
Your monad module will implement the following functions:
• return: ’a -> ’a Try.t
Creates a Success that contains your value.
• bind: ’a Try.t -> (’a -> ’b Try.t) -> ’b Try.t
Applies a function to your monad, converting it to a Failure if your function
argument raises an exception. Your function is only applied if your monad is a
Success.
• recover: ’a Try.t -> (exn -> ’a Try.t) -> ’a Try.t
If your monad is a Failure, applies the function to it.
• filter: ’a Try.t -> (’a -> bool) -> ’a Try.t
Converts your monad to a Failure if it is a Success that does not satisfy the
predicate given in the argument.
• flatten: ’a Try.t Try.t -> ’a Try.t
Flattens a nested Try into a simple Try. Note that a Success of Failure is treated
as a Failure.
12

Chapter IX
Exercise 04: Game, Set and Match.
Exercise : 04
Somebody set up us the bomb.
Turn-in directory : ex04/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

In this exercise, you will implement a monad named Set to represent a set. You are
free to choose whatever internal implementation you want for your sets, but your module
will provide at least the following functions:
• return: ’a -> ’a Set.t
Creates a singleton containing the value given as an argument.
• bind: ’a Set.t -> (’a -> ’b Set.t) -> ’b Set.t
Applies the function to every element in the set and returns a new set.
• union: ’a Set.t -> ’a Set.t -> ’a Set.t
Returns a new set containing the union of the two sets given as arguments.
• inter: ’a Set.t -> ’a Set.t -> ’a Set.t
Returns a new set containing the intersection of the two sets given as arguments.
• diff: ’a Set.t -> ’a Set.t -> ’a Set.t
Returns a new set containing the difference between the two sets given as arguments.
• filter: ’a Set.t -> (’a -> bool) -> ’a Set.t
Returns a new set containing only the elements that satisfy the predicate given as
an argument.
• foreach: ’a Set.t -> (’a -> unit) -> unit
Executes the function provided as an argument on every element in the set.
• for_all: ’a Set.t -> (’a -> bool) -> bool
Returns true if all the elements in the set satisfy the predicate given as an argument;
false otherwise.
13

OCaml

Monoids and Monads - 3 (also known as The Day the student stood still)

• exists: ’a Set.t -> (’a -> bool) -> bool
Returns true if at least one element in the set satisfies the predicate given as an
argument; false otherwise.
You will provide sufficient testing for your evaluation session.

This exercise is not mandatory.

14

Chapter X
Submission and Peer Evaluation
Turn in your assignment in your Git repository as usual. Only the work inside your repository will be evaluated during the defense. Don’t hesitate to double-check the names of
your folders and files to ensure they are correct.

The evaluation process will take place on the computer of the
evaluated group.

15

