Ocaml
Object-Oriented Programming - 2

Summary: The main theme of this module is to introduce the object oriented
programming style with OCaml.
Version: 1.00

Contents
I

Foreword

2

II

General rules

3

III

Ocaml piscine, general rules

4

IV

Day-Specific Rules

6

V

Exercise 00: Atoms

7

VI

Exercise 01: Molecules

8

VII

Exercise 02: Alkanes

10

VIII

Exercise 03: Reactions

11

IX

Exercise 04: Alkane Combustion

12

X

Exercise 05: Incomplete Combustion

14

XI

Submission and Peer Evaluation

16

1

Chapter I
Foreword
It was a pleasure to burn.
It was a special pleasure to see things eaten, to see things blackened and changed. With
the brass nozzle in his fists, with this great python spitting its venomous kerosene upon
the world, the blood pounded in his head, and his hands were the hands of some amazing
conductor playing all the symphonies of blazing and burning to bring down the tatters
and charcoal ruins of history. With his symbolic helmet numbered 451 on his stolid head,
and his eyes all orange flame with the thought of what came next, he flicked the igniter
and the house jumped up in a gorging fire that burned the evening sky red and yellow
and black. He strode in a swarm of fireflies. He wanted above all, like the old joke, to
shove a marshmallow on a stick in the furnace, while the flapping pigeon-winged books
died on the porch and lawn of the house. While the books went up in sparkling whirls
and blew away on a wind turned dark with burning.
Montag grinned the fierce grin of all men singed and driven back by flame.
He knew that when he returned to the firehouse, he might wink at himself, a minstrel
man, burnt-corked, in the mirror. Later, going to sleep, he would feel the fiery smile still
gripped by his face muscles, in the dark. It never went away, that smile, it never ever
went away, as long as he remembered.
By Ray Bradbury, in Fahrenheit 451.

2

Chapter II
General rules
• Your project must be realized in a virtual machine.
• Your virtual machine must have all the necessary software to complete your project.
These softwares must be configured and installed.
• You can choose the operating system to use for your virtual machine.
• You must be able to use your virtual machine from a cluster computer.
• You must use a shared folder between your virtual machine and your host machine.
• During your evaluations you will use this folder to share with your repository.
• Your functions should not quit unexpectedly (segmentation fault, bus error, double
free, etc) apart from undefined behaviors. If this happens, your project will be
considered non functional and will receive a 0 during the evaluation.
• We encourage you to create test programs for your project even though this work
won’t have to be submitted and won’t be graded. It will give you a chance
to easily test your work and your peers’ work. You will find those tests especially
useful during your defence. Indeed, during defence, you are free to use your tests
and/or the tests of the peer you are evaluating.
• Submit your work to your assigned git repository. Only the work in the git repository will be graded. If Deepthought is assigned to grade your work, it will be done
after your peer-evaluations. If an error happens in any section of your work during
Deepthought’s grading, the evaluation will stop.

3

Chapter III
Ocaml piscine, general rules
• Every output goes to the standard output, and will be ended by a newline, unless
specified otherwise.
• The imposed filenames must be followed to the letter, as well as class names, function names and method names, etc.
• Unless otherwise explicitly stated, the keywords open, for and while are forbidden.
Their use will be flagged as cheating, no questions asked.
• Turn-in directories are ex00/, ex01/, . . . , exn/.
• You must read the examples thoroughly. They can contain requirements that are
not obvious in the exercise’s description.
• Since you are allowed to use the OCaml syntaxes you learned about since the beginning of the piscine, you are not allowed to use any additional syntaxes, modules
and libraries unless explicitly stated otherwise.
• The exercices must be done in order. The graduation will stop at the first failed
exercice. Yes, the old school way.
• Read each exercise FULLY before starting it! Really, do it.
• The compiler to use is ocamlopt. When you are required to turn in a function, you
must also include anything necessary to compile a full executable. That executable
should display some tests that prove that you’ve done the exercise correctly.
• Remember that the special token ";;" is only used to end an expression in the
interpreter. Thus, it must never appear in any file you turn in. Regardless, the
interpreter is a powerfull ally, learn to use it at its best as soon as possible!
• The subject can be modified up to 4 hours before the final turn-in time.
• In case you’re wondering, no coding style is enforced during the OCaml piscine. You
can use any style you like, no restrictions. But remember that a code your peerevaluator can’t read is a code he or she can’t grade. As usual, big functions are a
weak style.
• You will NOT be graded by a program, unless explictly stated in the subject.
Therefore, you are given a certain amount of freedom in how you choose to do the
4

Ocaml

Object-Oriented Programming - 2

exercises. However, some piscine day might explicitly cancel this rule, and you will
have to respect directions and outputs perfectly.
• Only the requested files must be turned in and thus present on the repository during
the peer-evaluation.
• Even if the subject of an exercise is short, it’s worth spending some time on it to
be absolutely sure you understand what’s expected of you, and that you did it in
the best possible way.
• By Odin, by Thor! Use your brain!!!

5

Chapter IV
Day-Specific Rules
• For every exercise, you are required to turn in a full program with examples to
prove your classes are working correctly. You may use any function or operator
you want or see fit to use in your examples — as long as you don’t need to link an
external library to use it.
• Each exercise in today’s subject is meant to be a sequel to the previous one; as a
consequence, you will likely need to use your previous exercises to solve the one
you’re working on.
• As an obvious consequence, any exercise with 0 points for any reason (not turned
in, does not compile, crashes, etc.) means the defense will not continue any further.
• You are generally free to use any type of data structure you want. However, every
time a method returns an associative list, it must be sorted in ascending order by
its index.
• All chemical formulae for molecules must be written using the Hill notation.
• All the classes you implement today must be functional. Any imperative class in
your code means no points for the entire exercise.
• Your code will not be modified during defenses, which means a non-tested feature
is a non-functional feature.
• For each exercise, you are required to write a Makefile, which will compile your
entire exercise. You can use OCamlMakefile to write your Makefile.

6

Chapter V
Exercise 00: Atoms
Exercise : 00
Our whole universe was in a hot, dense state...
Turn-in directory : ex00/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

You will write a virtual class named atom for... an atom. Today we’re doing some
chemistry! An atom is defined by a few things:
• A name, of type string.
• A symbol, of type string.
• An atomic_number, of type int.
All these attributes have to be methods, and you have to be able to set what they
return through the atom’s constructor. Of course, feel free to look up what an atom is if
you don’t understand what these are.
Your class will contain at least a to_string method to briefly describe your atom
and an equals method to compare atoms; aside from that, you can implement anything
you think is suitable or may need in the next exercises.
To go along with your atom virtual class, you will also write some real atoms, which
will, of course, inherit your atom class. You have to write at least the following classes:
• hydrogen
• carbon
• oxygen
• And three more atoms of your choice, as long as they really exist.

7

Chapter VI
Exercise 01: Molecules
Exercise : 01
Then nearly fourteen billion years ago, expansion started. Wait...
Turn-in directory : ex01/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

Now that you have your atoms, you can make some molecules! If you don’t know
what a molecule is, please look it up before beginning this exercise.
Your molecule class is virtual, and it needs at least the following elements:
• A name, of type string.
• A formula, of type string.
All these attributes have to be methods. Of course, feel free to look up what a molecule
is if you don’t understand what these are.
One very important constraint: you have to store the molecule’s atoms internally, and
this atom storage must be used to compute the molecule’s chemical formula. Also, the
chemical formula must be formatted using the Hill notation. As such, your constructor
will only accept a name and a list of atoms.
The chemical formula is simple: it’s a small string that describes what atoms and how
many of them are contained in the molecule. Let’s build an example with Trinitrotoluene
(or TNT for short). We get the list of atoms, and we end up with:
• 3 atoms of Nitrogen
• 5 atoms of Hydrogen
• 6 atoms of Oxygen
• 7 atoms of Carbon
We know the symbols of these atoms are N, H, O and C. All we have to do is enumerate
their symbols and their quantities, right? So you would get something like: N3 H5 O6 C7 .
8

Ocaml

Object-Oriented Programming - 2

But NO! WAIT! That’s not how it works. The Hill notation says we get carbon, then
hydrogen, then everything else in alphabetical order. So the result is: C7 H5 N3 O6 . Of
course, you can’t really write subscripts in a terminal, so writing it behind the symbol as
it is is fine, like so: C7H5N3O6.
Your class will contain at least a to_string method to briefly describe what your
molecule is, and an equals method to compare molecules; aside from that, you can
implement anything you think is suitable or may need in the next exercises.
To go along with your molecule class, you will write some real molecules, which will,
of course, inherit your molecule class. You have to write at least the following classes:
• Water (H2 O)
• Carbon dioxide (CO2 )
• And three more molecules of your choice, as long as they really exist.

Some elements, like salts, ions, and other things, are not considered
as molecules in their strictest meaning. However, for today we’ll
keep it simple and assume that a molecule is simply an aggregation of
atoms, as long as its overall electrical charge is neutral.

9

Chapter VII
Exercise 02: Alkanes
Exercise : 02
The Earth began to cool, the autotrophs began to drool...
Turn-in directory : ex02/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

Molecules are cool, but today we’re focusing on a particular type of molecule, which is
alkanes. Alkanes are a family of simple molecules composed of just carbon and hydrogen,
which means we can create alkanes easily! The formula of an acyclic alkane is Cn H2n+2 .
The name of the alkane simply depends on the value you give to n.
You don’t have to handle every possible alkane (because actually, you
can’t). Your data should be able to handle 1 ≤ n ≤ 12; you won’t be
tested (and have the right to refuse to be tested) with n > 12.

Note that an alkane is still a molecule, which means you still have to provide the
following methods:
• name
• formula
• to_string
• equals
To go along with your alkane class, you will write... some real alkanes! As usual, they
will inherit your alkane class, and you will write at least the following ones:
• methane
• ethane
• octane
10

Chapter VIII
Exercise 03: Reactions
Exercise : 03
Neanderthals developed tools, we built a wall (we built the pyramids!)
Turn-in directory : ex03/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

Now we’re doing interesting things! Chemical reactions. A chemical reaction is a
simple thing, really. You have some molecules at the start of your reaction, and you
have... some molecules at the end. There is only one really important rule to follow,
which is: you must have the same exact amount of atoms at the start and at the end
of your reaction. “Nothing is lost, nothing is created, everything is transformed.” If
you’ve never heard that sentence, look up Antoine de Lavoisier and what he has done for
chemistry.
Basically, you can instantiate a new chemical reaction with a list of molecules. Then
you can call a get_result method to get the result.
All that explanation was good, but now let’s talk about code! You will write a virtual
class named reaction, which will be instantiated with two collections of molecules, one
for the start and one for the end of your reaction.
Your class will also provide the following virtual methods:
• get_start:

(molecule * int) list

• get_result:

(molecule * int) list

• balance:

reaction

• is_balanced:

bool

Your class doesn’t have to do anything: all you have to provide is the structure. But
if you think hard enough, you might realize that some behavior is common to all possible
chemical reactions. Feel free to implement those you feel useful to implement. *wink
wink*

11

Chapter IX
Exercise 04: Alkane Combustion
Exercise : 04
Math, science, history unraveling the mystery...
Turn-in directory : ex04/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

Now that we know what a chemical reaction is, let’s do a real one! Do you remember
the alkanes I had you write a few exercises ago? Because now we’re going to burn them.
Our class will be named alkane_combustion, and it will be a subtype of reaction (what
did you expect?).
But first, let’s clear up some theory. An alkane combustion means you start with
an alkane and some molecular oxygen, and you end up with carbon dioxide and water.
Always. That means our reaction will be (for example, with methane):
CH4 + O2 → CO2 + H2 O
But wait! It’s not actually that simple. I did say you had to have the same exact
amount of atoms at the start and at the end, right? And if you look at what I just wrote,
that doesn’t really add up: you start with 1 carbon, 4 hydrogen, and 2 oxygen, and you
end with one carbon, 2 hydrogen, and 3 oxygen; so you end up with not enough hydrogen
and too much oxygen.
That’s where stoichiometric coefficients come in. Of course, don’t forget to
look up the word if it sounded like Hebrew to you. But basically, they are coefficients
you add to the molecules in your reaction, so that you have the same amount of atoms
on both sides. As a result:
CH4 + 2 O2 → CO2 + 2 H2 O
Now on both sides you have 1 carbon, 4 hydrogen, and 4 oxygen. Good, everything
works!
Now let’s talk about code. You will construct your class with a list of alkane objects,
and it will implement the reaction class’s methods:

12

Ocaml

Object-Oriented Programming - 2

• get_start: returns the list of molecules at the beginning of the reaction. Throws
an exception if the reaction is not balanced.
• get_result: returns the list of molecules at the end of the reaction. Throws an
exception if the reaction is not balanced.
• balance: returns a new alkane combustion, with the right (and smallest possible)
stoichiometric coefficients so that your combustion is balanced.
• is_balanced: true if your reaction is balanced, false otherwise.
Your balance method will have to process the list of alkanes, possibly removing duplicates, and then compute all the adequate coefficients for your reaction to work.

13

Chapter X
Exercise 05: Incomplete Combustion
Exercise : 05
It all started with the Big Bang! (BANG!)
Turn-in directory : ex05/
Files to turn in : *.ml, Makefile
Forbidden functions : None

Balancing alkane combustions was the main goal of your day, and if you succeeded
in doing that, congratulations! I’m very proud of you. This final exercise is for those of
you who want to go a bit further (but you still have to do it if you want full points on
the day. :))
You will take your alkane_combustion class and add a new method to it, called
get_incomplete_results. And by incomplete results, I mean incomplete combustion.
There are cases when your alkane isn’t provided with enough oxygen to completely burn,
which leads to carbon monoxide or soot being created. For example, with ethane and
propane:
C2 H6 + 3 O2 → CO2 + CO + 3 H2 O
C2 H6 + 2 O2 → CO + C + 3 H2 O
C3 H8 + 4 O2 → 2 CO2 + C + 4 H2 O
C3 H8 + 3 O2 → CO2 + 2 C + 4 H2 O
C3 H8 + 3 O2 → CO2 + 2 C + 4 H2 O
C3 H8 + 3 O2 → 2 CO + C + 4 H2 O
And so on...
Of course, these aren’t the only possible solutions. There might be solutions with no
carbon dioxide at all, but obviously if there’s no carbon monoxide, then it’s a complete
combustion and it doesn’t count. Your new method will be able to change the amount
of oxygen in the reaction to compute the possible outcomes, which will be returned with
type (int * (molecule * int) list) list, using the amount of oxygen as the list’s
index.

14

Ocaml

Object-Oriented Programming - 2

Obviously, chemical reactions are much more complex than that, and
usually involve the molecules’ internal structure. Today we’ll keep
it simple and consider that a reaction is valid if and only if their
stoichiometric coefficients add up correctly. That’s it. If you
can work out all the possible outcomes using CO2, CO, C, and H2O, I’m
happy with that.

This exercise is not mandatory.

15

Chapter XI
Submission and Peer Evaluation
Turn in your assignment in your Git repository as usual. Only the work inside your repository will be evaluated during the defense. Don’t hesitate to double-check the names of
your folders and files to ensure they are correct.

The evaluation process will happen on the computer of the evaluated
group.

16

